Employ Modern Trends: GraphQL, Gatsby, Vite, Next.js, MUI (#5733)
DevExpress/devextreme-documentation: concepts/90 Integration Guides/40 Optimize Your Data Grids with GraphQL.md

# Optimize Your Data Grids with GraphQL

## What is GraphQL?

GraphQL is a trending API query language and data processing layer. Facebook engineers created GraphQL because REST APIs did not meet their performance requirements.

Modern websites need to display large amounts of data from more than one source. To get this data from a REST API, applications have to issue multiple network requests. Each request takes time to resolve, which slows the application down. If you don't optimize your SQL queries, API responses may include unnecessary data. The application wastes time loading data users don't get to see.

GraphQL is an intermediary layer that takes a single API request, and responds to it with data from multiple sources. It allows you to get very specific, and does not include unnecessary data in its responses. You can replace your REST API with GraphQL, or use GraphQL alongside your REST API.

For more information about the differences between GraphQL and REST, read the following article on the DevExtreme blog: [LINK].

To try GraphQL for yourself, follow this tutorial.

## Project overview

This project consists of a client and a server.

> The client is a Vite/React Node.js application that displays a DevExtreme Data Grid. The server is an Express.JS app that uses a GraphQL API to serve JSON data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client is a Vite/React Node.js application that displays a DevExtreme Data Grid. The server is an Express.js app that uses a GraphQL API to serve JSON data.
```

> The client is a Vite/React Node.js application that displays a DevExtreme Data Grid. The server is an Express.js app that uses a GraphQL API to serve JSON data.

Reviewer 2: Again, only React?

    <!--Shell-->
        npm create vite@latest

3. Follow the wizard's instructions to create a **React** / **TypeScript** application named `vite-react`:

    ![Vite wizard](/images/GraphQL/vite-create.png)

4. Open the folder, and install the necessary dependencies for the Vite app:

    <!--Shell-->
        cd vite-react; npm i @apollo/client devextreme devextreme-react graphql loadsh whatwg-fetch

5. Copy the code from the [Data Grid CRUD demo](https://js.devexpress.com/React/Demos/WidgetsGallery/Demo/DataGrid/CRUDOperations/MaterialBlueLight/) to your Vite application.

6. (Optional) Launch the application to confirm that it works:

    <!--Shell-->
        npm run dev

    ![Start the server](/images/GraphQL/run-dev.png)

## Step 3: Server set-up

1. Go back to the root folder of your project, and create a `server` subfolder:

    <!--Shell-->
        mkdir server; cd server

2. Create an `App.js` file inside the new folder.

    Populate it with the following code that initializes an Express.js server and enables the use of GraphQL.

    <!--JavaScript-->
        const express = require('express'); 
        const cors = require('cors'); 

>         const { createHandler } = require('graphql-http/lib/use/express'); // enables the use of GraphQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        const { createHandler } = require('graphql-http/lib/use/express'); // Enables the use of GraphQL
```

        const OrdersSchema = require('../schema/orders-schema'); 
        

>         const app = express(); // initializes the Express.js server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        const app = express(); // Initializes the Express.js server
```

                        ShipCountry: { type: GraphQLString },  
                        ShipVia: { type: GraphQLInt } 
                    }), 
                    resolve(parent, args) { 
                        const index = orders.findIndex(order => order.OrderID == args.OrderID); 
                        const oldOrder = orders[index]; 
                        const newOrder = { ...oldOrder, ...args } 
                        orders.splice(index, 1, newOrder) 
                        return newOrder; 
                    } 
                } 
            } 
        }) 
        
        module.exports = new GraphQLSchema({ 
            query: Query, 
            mutation: Mutation, 
        }); 

## Step 4: Connect the frontend to the backend

The [@apollo/client](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/) library enables us to use GraphQL on the client.

Import the following objects from the library into the `App.tsx` file of your Vite project:

<!--JavaScript-->
    import { gql, useApolloClient, useMutation } from '@apollo/client';

The `gql` object allows you to form GraphQL queries. The `useMutation` function allows you to map these queries to GraphQL mutations.

> If you struggle to understand this section, read the [Apollo documentation](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/api/link/introduction/) for a full overview of the library's data flow. Consult the [source code](https://github.com/ivanblinov2k17/graphql/blob/master/client/vite-react/src/App.tsx) of the tutorial repository to view the solution in full.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have difficulties with this section, read the [Apollo documentation](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/api/link/introduction/) for a full overview of the library's data flow. Consult the [source code](https://github.com/ivanblinov2k17/graphql/blob/master/client/vite-react/src/App.tsx) of the tutorial repository to view the solution in full.
```
